another band of heavy rain, quite
squally, which will be spreading
slowly eastwards across the country.
You ran
You can see it on the pressure
You ran see it on the pressure
chart. It’s
You can see it on the pressure
chart. It’s currently across
Northern Ireland and western
Scotland, some of the rain is quite
heavy, strong winds. By the end of
the night it will beep across much
of central and eastern Scotland,
northern England, and Wales, strong
northern England, and Walas, strong
and gusty
northern England, and Wales, strong
and gusty winds. Ahead of it dry,
windy, milas
windy, miles behind it, we’ll see
windy, milas behind it, we’ll see
lots of
windy, miles behind it, we’ll see
lots of blustery showers pushing
into the north—west of the UK.
into the north-west of the UK.
Tomorrow,
into the north—west of the UK.
Tomorrow, we’ll have rain first
thing which should clear through
thing which should dear through
then
thing which should clear through
then another bright day with
sunshine and showers. We have the
hand of heavy,
band of heavy, squally rain across
the central parts of the country.
Eventually that will clear away from
the south—east by lunchtime, lots of
the south-east by lunchtime, lots of
showers
the south—east by lunchtime, lots of
showers will continue to pile into
Northern Ireland and western
Scotland, some could be thundery. It
will be windy, 40—50 miles an hour
will be windy, 40-50 milas an hour
gusts, fairty
will be windy, 40—50 miles an hour
gusts, fairly blustery but not quite
gusts, fairty blustery but not quite
a strong
gusts, fairly blustery but not quite
a strong further south. Despite the
sunshine it’s going to be on the
chilly side,
chilly side,10—13. Into the
chilly side, 10-13 . Into the
weekend,
chilly side,10—13. Into the
weekend, low pressure
chilly side, 10—13. Into the
weekend, low pressure dominates the
scene, both Saturday and Sunday. A
squeeze in across southern parts of
Britain especially on Sunday and
lots of weather fronts indicating
spells of rain. And lots of weather
fronts indicating spells of rain. An
unsettled weekend.
I’m not good at relationships,
so I would love to just...
..fix that.
Something really bad just happened.
What? Darby?
Iran into Augie. BOTH: No!
Yeah! He’s in New York,
which I would know
if I hadn’t unfollowed him.
And he has a new girlfriend!
Eww.
There are good things happening
in my life.
You are playing the long game.
You keep your eyes on the prize.
When you talk about love, you turn
into Coach Taylor. Really sweet.
A demonstration took place
against the police...
..which degenerated into totally
inexcusable violence.
This is a sustained campaign...
Hands off!
..against black people...
Hands off! Hands off!
..and today we will say
enough is enough!
Hands off!
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel, Matt Hancock,
Conservative minister since 2013.
He joined the Cabinet
as Theresa May’s Culture Secretary,
before being appointed
Health Secretary just over two
years ago, a post he held
onto when BorisJohnson
became party leader.
Labour’s ShadowJustice Secretary
and MP for 20 years and minister
in the government’s of both
Tony Blair and Gordon
Brown, David Lemmy.
Immunologist and professor
of mucosal infection
at Imperial College London,
where he leads the effort
to find a vaccine for
coronavirus, Robin Shattock.
Joining us down the line,
Merryn Somerset Webb,
a finance and economics commentator,
journalist and editor in chief
of Money Week, and comedian,
writer and guest on shows such
as The Last Leg and Eight Out
of Ten Cats, Rosiejones.
Good evening, welcome
to my guest here in the studio.
Merryn, welcome to you, joining us
down the line from Edinburgh,
very good to see you,
and our live audience
is with us again.
Very good to see you via video link.
Tonight you’rejoining us
from Dover, thank you very
much for doing that.
And for those of you joining
us from home, dojoin
in the conversation on social media,
@bbcquestiontime and the usual way.
And before we get going, Ijust
want to say we are going to do
things a bit differently
to begin with.
We have had a lot of questions
about the vaccine that we all hope
is going to get us out of this
situation, so we are going
to do quite a number of questions
quite quickly to you,
Matt, and then of course,
for the rest of you on the panel,
if you want to pitch in,
please do, and of course you there,
please do, and of course you,
the audience in Dover.
There is going to be a lot
of questions coming your way
to begin with before we move
onto other topics.
So, let’s have ourfirst
question from Mark Reynolds.
So, my question is,
how many people need
to have the vaccine before it
would be successful?
Now we have heard that there
is going to be some vaccines
possibly before the end of the year,
but it is going to be
significantly less than we need.
How many people need to be
vaccinated for it to be successful?
Yes, what percentage of
the population are we talking about?
Well, the honest truth to that
question is that we don’t yet know.
It is one of the many
things that we don’t yet
know about the vaccine,
and the reason for that is that
in the trials that the vaccines
undergo, you test for how effective
they are protecting the individual,
and also of course how safe
they are, and if they are safe
and effective then we can
start to roll them out.
And the early date from the Pfizer
vaccine shows that it looks
like it is 90% effective
at protecting individuals,
so that is great, so as soon,
or if it passes the safety data,
and, you know, that is a big hurdle
that it still has not gone over,
then we can start rolling it out
and it starts protecting people
as soon as they have had it,
a week or so after the second dose.
But what you do not know
at the moment is whether it needs
to be 50% of the population or 70%
of the population,
you are still not there.
Because the evidence
from the trial is how much it
protects an individual,
and you can only find out,
once a lot of people have taken it,
what the direct impact
is on stopping the spread
of the disease.
Because this particular vaccine,
Robert, we don’t know if it stops
people catching coronavirus,
but we do know that it stops them,
or stops 90% of them,
getting sick from it.
Yes.
It is really early.
We know that it prevents
people developing disease,
for a period of time that it
has been studied.
We don’t know whether it
will protect people for six months,
12 months, and we have no
information right now
as to whether it will prevent
transmission, so that
means its first priority is actually
to use it to protect
vulnerable populations.
We have a question exactly
on that from John.
Can the government confirm that
if and when the vaccine is approved,
it will be distributed strictly
based upon clinical needs?
Yes.
That is our proposal.
We have a committee that is made up
of clinicians and experts that
advises me, as Health Secretary,
in my formal capacity,
theJoint Committee on Vaccinations
and Immunisations, and this group
looks at the data from a vaccine,
and they have been working closely
with Pfizer and AstroZeneca
on the two early vaccines,
and it works out what is the best
clinical way of protecting most
people, and they have put out
an interim recommendation,
which is that first we should
vaccinate people who are resident
in care homes and the people
who work looking after them,
and then health and social
care workers and then,
essentially down the age range,
because for all the different
things, like obesity,
that we know has an impact
on your vulnerability to disease,
we know that your age is the single
biggest factor by a long stretch,
and so, the answer, very simple
answer to your question, yes,
we will vaccinate according
to clinical priority,
because that is how
we save the most lives.
John, is this of particular
concern for you?
Is that why you have
asked the question?
No, I have asked the question
because I am obviously the oldest
person here this evening
on the virtual panel,
probably in the whole audience,
but obviously I would be one
of those down the line to be
affected, not in the first tranche,
but certainly I am well over 70 now,
so I would be fairly close to that.
I personally, I have heard of quite
a few people who are scared
of having the vaccine,
but I personally would not
even hesitate having it,
because I know a lot of people
who are very scared
at the moment, simple as that.
And, Rosie, is it clear
to you what someone in your
situation might get the vaccine?
No, not really.
I know you have mentioned care
workers and what about people
who still need to work,
what about teachers,
what about people who
work in supermarkets?
Where in the line do they come?
Yes, so the clinical priority
is all about protecting people
according to essentially their risk
from the virus, and so after we have
gone down to the over 655,
according to the proposal
on the data that we have seen,
and they may update it
as we see more information,
then you go to those
who are particularly vulnerable
from all age groups,
and then after that
down to the over 505.
Once you get below the over 50s,
there is less of a clinical
justification for any particular...
What do you mean,
below the over 505?
Well, the people who don’t
have an illness which makes them
particularly vulnerable
to coronavirus, who are
aged between 18 and 50,
they are the least likely to die
from coronavirus, and so
the clinicians who have advised me
on this expert panel say
that they come after all
the people who are either
older or work in health and social
care or who have a particular
vulnerability, and unfortunately
we know quite a lot
about who is vulnerable to Covid
because of having looked at who has
been badly affected over
the last nine months or so.
The head of the Vaccine Task Force
says that she was anticipating only
5096 of the population would ever
get a vaccine.
This was before the Pfizer
announcement was made, so is that
your anticipation as well?
It sounds like it is,
from what you are saying?
No, not necessarily.
We have learned more and more
about the vaccine as time has gone
on and the latest advice
is that we should go in the order
that I have described
and then to the under 505,
but not to children,
because this vaccine has not
been tested on children,
it is not designed for children
and anyway children are very,
very unlikely to get
ill from coronavirus.
I think two things, one,
you didn’t mention Britain’s black,
Asian and minority ethnic
population, which we know
are disproportionately
dying as a consequence,
and I hope that they
are part of the group.
There are other front line workers,
other than care home workers
and nurses, and we can’t have one
way, the head of the Vaccine
Task Force saying 50%
and then one week later,
the Secretary of State
for Health saying, no.
Is it less than 50%
or is it more than 50%?
Well, we will get to, I hope,
should a vaccine come off,
and of course it is still uncertain,
we will get to more than 50%,
and that is because we have learned
more about the details of both
the virus and the vaccine.
In a week?
No, the comments that you referred
to were some time ago.
And the expert body who advises us
has published its interim
recommendations a few weeks ago,
and then it will publish the final
recommendations when we get
the final data about the vaccine,
about any vaccine, it should it be
both effective and safe,
and those are the two absolutely
critical things
that we will look at.
And if people can pay for it,
will they get it more quickly?
Well, I don’t think that
that is going to be possible.
So does that mean that
the government is going to buy up
all the doses, and so people
will not be able to go to a private
doctor or what have you and say,
"I would like that"?
It may not be in this particular
phase, or they may not be eligible
for the government guidelines,
but "I can buy it,
so therefore I can have it?"
I don’t foresee that,
because it has been hard enough
buying this as a government...
As those who have developed
the vaccine have done and have
been with governments,
so we have bought, on behalf
of the whole UK population,
and we intend to roll—out,
according to clinical priority.
Let us take another
question from Joe Craft.
Yes, good evening.
Is the storage and distribution
infrastructure in place to guarantee
the viability of the vaccine?
This is complicated,
isn’t it, because you need
these super freezers,
that keep it at —70 degrees.
Yes.
The Scottish Government, I know,
has already bought some
of these super freezers.
Yes.
Are you going to be
able to pull this off?
Yes.
You sound very, very confident.
I remember you coming
in here and saying that about PPE,
in the very early stage
of the first wave.
So, come on!
On PPE, I remember sitting in this
chair and explaining
how difficult it was...
Yes, but you also said
that we will have it sorted at that
time by the weekend.
And we got there.
But on this, the NHS is in charge
of distributing it and we are...
The UK Government is buying this
vaccine and the other back
vaccine and the other vaccines
and it is important
we have a portfolio,
that we have several
and we are buying them for the whole
UK, and then the NHS in each
country, in England, Scotland
and Wales and Northern Ireland
is responsible for the deployment.
It is a challenge,
it is incredibly difficult.
In fact, I would add one
more challenge, Joe,
you talked about the distribution
and the storage, there is one
other really hard part,
which is the manufacture,
which in the case of this vaccine
that Pfizer are doing, but these
things are hard to manufacture.
You know...
You are not responsible for that.
What you are responsible for is
making sure that people can get it.
I will come onto that,
but you have got to think,
they are hard to do the science,
they are then hard to manufacture,
this thing, it is not
a chemical that is made,
this is biological.
Then it arrives and you have to keep
it at —70, and we have come out,
the NHS, we have known for some
time, so the NHS has been getting
hold of the serious deep freezers
and then you have to distribute it
and it will be a huge
effort from the NHS.
They are supported by the armed
services in doing that.
Now, thankfully, the NHS is a very
significant organisation that has
reaches into all parts
of the country.
So, the reason I answered,
when you said, are you ready to do
it, it is something we are working
on every day, it will be
complicated, it will be a huge
challenge, but I am sure
that the NHS is up to it.
I mean, I think we need to recognise
there has been enormous
excitement about this vaccine,
because it is the first evidence
that it is a vaccine
preventable disease,
but that does not mean that it
will be the only vaccine,
and I think what is encouraging is,
if we also believe the news
that is coming out of Russia,
we will see a series of vaccines
coming through, which may have
different advantages for deployment.
So, right now, we have to act
as if this is the only vaccine
that is going to work,
but we could have a very different
conversation in two,
three or four weeks’ time,
and I think it returns to this
issue of prioritisation,
it is a difficult vaccine to get
out, there are about 10 million
vulnerable population,
and if you started vaccinating
inJanuary, given that it takes 5—6
weeks to get immunity,
and you did 1 million people a week,
we would not get that 10 million
vaccinated until way into April,
and that is assuming that everyone
comes in for their first shot
and for their second shot
and you are not playing catch up,
so the logistical
problem is immense.
That does not mean that people
should be off the hook,
but it is to understand that
challenge, and that is why we need
to prioritise the way
the vaccine is rolled out.
Ellie.
Hi, good evening.
So, are we aware at all of what sort
of other countries are doing
in regards to the vaccine?
Is there much liaison going on with
the World Health Organization,
because obviously China
was the first affected,
and how far have they advanced
in terms of coming along
with a vaccine?
Is there much, you know,
communication there?
Let me get a few questions
and we will put them to Matt
and possibly to David as well.
Marie.
Hi, I was just wondering
whether the government could foresee
any potential supply issues
after Brexit at the end of the year
and whether that would coordinate
any transportation issues
with the vaccine coming into the UK?
Well, I think we might come
to that point in a moment,
so I am going to park it,
but it has obviously been
one of the big issues.
Eamon.
Yes, I guess it is more
of a statement than a question,
but I think that Matt is really
underestimating the massive
challenges that we are going to have
with the supply and distribution
of this product, because I have seen
first hand with the flu
vaccination campaign,
this flu season, we have had massive
issues with pharmacies
running out of stock,
using up their stock quite
quickly and not been able
to replenish that stock.
GP surgeries being out of stock
for having to wait for more
than a month to get new stock in,
and the flu vaccine
is something that is much,
much more straightforward,
Amy, you are saying that
as a pharmacist, it is worth just
repeating the words ofJohn Vale
from Oxford University
who predicted, with some confidence,
he said that life could be back
to normal by spring,
with the big caveat,
provided they do not screw
up the distribution.
Ijust want to respond to Eamon’s
point, because I totally agree
with him, and as a pharmacist,
you will have seen this,
the question I was asked
was, can we do it?
And my answer to
that is, yes, we can.
Well, the question was,
is the storage and distribution
infrastructure in place
to guarantee it?
Is this going to be
an enormous challenge?
Of course!
This will be one of the biggest
civilian operations in history,
and I think it will have
all the challenges that Eamon
set out, but I think
that the NHS can rise to them,
and I think that we can
come together and we can
help make it happen.
So, I am confident that we can make
it happen, and I am also highly
confident that it is going to be
extremely difficult,
and also one of the biggest
logistical exercises that this
country has ever seen,
and you are right, there have been
huge challenges in so many parts
of the response to this coronavirus,
huge challenges, and we have learnt
a huge amount all the way through,
and it hasn’t been easy, but,
you know, we have got
through so many of those challanges
in the past.
I am sorry, Matt, but it is just
a bit facile when you say
things like, yes, we can.
The point is that we have heard
there have been problemsjust
getting out the flu vaccine this
year, and we have still got
to do more, obviously,
because flu runs with us right
into the spring, we know that
you blew 500 million
on PPE that did not work.
We know that it is now
nine months and 12 days
since the first infection in York,
and we still, in the sixth richest
economy in the world,
have not got a successful Test,
Track and Trace system,
and so, in the end, this
is about public confidence.
We need people to believe
and to take the vaccine,
but I think you are being asked,
can you do it, given that these
freezers are, you know, —70,
are necessary to get this
distributed, and you can understand
why people are slightly nervous
that we are going to be well
into the summer before this vaccine
is properly rolled out.
All I would say is that it is not
can I do it, can we do it?
Right?
This is something that we,
as a nation, need to do,
together with the NHS obviously
in the late...
Well, hang on a minute,
that is all very well...
No, no, no, everybody coming
forward to be vaccinated,
everybody participating,
in the same way that
with social distancing,
that is something we all need to do
and, yes, absolutely,
this is doable.
I am not saying it is easy
and I am not saying it
will be straightforward,
I am just saying, we have got to do
it and we will get it done.
I think it is very easy to say,
it is all of us, no,
it is up to you and the government
to lead us and to give us
the answers that we are not getting.
As a member of the country that
I love, I am worried
and scared because I am not
getting any answers.
Ask the questions and we will
try to answer them.
One of the challenges
of the pandemic is there
are all sorts of questions that
everybody wants an answer to.
All right, well, let us take some
more from our audience.
Donna.
Thank you.
A recent survey found that around
one in six British people
were unlikely to agree
to being vaccinated
against coronavirus.
What, in your opinion,
in the opinion of the panel,
is the best way to reassure
the public that the new Covid—19
vaccine will be both
effective and safe?
Before you answer that, Matt,
can Ijust see if there is anyone
in our audience who is hesitating
about taking the vaccine?
Who is not that sure about it?
Who have we got here?
Kay.
Yeah, Matt, hi.
I am concerned, because I do not
believe there has been adequate
time to put the vaccine
through the rigorous testing
that we would expect it to go
through before being given
to the general public.
What do you say or not?
And Ellie?
I would agree with Kay,
especially when you look at previous
things like thalidomide and things
like that, you know,
are we really fully aware of,
you know, the side effects that
could come along with the vaccine?
Jay, I know you had some reticence
about taking the vaccine as well.
Yeah, I have got to say,
I do agree with Matt completely,
because we are in an unknown
pandemic at the minute,
so there are going to be a lot
of unknowns coming up for us,
so I think staying positive,
looking to the future.
I mean, during the start
of the pandemic, we had
all those volunteers,
apply for helping out.
If that can happen again, who knows
what can happen, I suppose?
Would you be happy to
take the vaccine, Jay?
I am probably one of the cautious
people, to be fair.
I would rather wait and see
what the effect is, first of all.
Imean...
So at the moment, you are not sure?
And, Merryn, you wanted in.
Yeah.
I just wanted to say
that there is a big trust
issue around vaccines,
and looking at the different
surveys, you can see,
depending on the surveys,
between seven and 25% of people
will say that they are
generally quite suspicious
of a new vaccine like this.
So there does need to be some kind
of campaign around the safety
and the reminding everybody
of the accuracy of the vaccines
that we have had over the last
couple of hundred years.
It is really important to remember
that back in the 18005, you know,
20 or 30% of kids died
before they were five,
and we have put in place a vaccine
programme
since that one, and
a couple of hundred,
but around this idea of trust,
there is probably a very simple way
to make the general population
believe in the vaccine and trust
in the vaccine and perhaps,
at the same time, to increase
a little trust in our politicians,
which obviously has fallen off quite
substantially over the last nine
months, and that, I would suggest,
that Matt, you have the vaccine
first and then every other MP has it
and then we can roll it
out to a couple of top
civil servants as well,
so once you have all had it,
there is an element of trust
and that, we wait two weeks,
everything is fine, then
you can start rolling it
out to everybody else.
So, you want to wait and see
basically if Matt does
not drop to the floor,
frothing at the mouth,
kind of thing, before
you take it, Merryn?
That would reassure the population
that it is absolutely fine.
Well, I would take the vaccine
as soon as I am allowed to.
But what about taking it just
to kind of encourage others?
I would be happy to do that,
the problem is that we’ll be
putting me ahead of the queue
in terms of clinical need.
Now, because I work
in the Department of Health,
I can’t, as it happens,
as a health care worker,
so if my taking it, when health care
workers are allowed to take it,
so notjumping the queue,
if that would persuade a single
other person to take it and give
confidence to others,
then I would be absolutely happy to.
Shall we do a totally
unscientific straw poll?
Put your hand up in the audience
if you think Matt should be one
of the first to take it.
Quite a lot, but not unanimity.
Daniel is nodding his
head there vigorously.
Robin, I know, because I have spoken
to some of our audience members
already, before we came on,
that quite a few of them
are very happy to take
the vaccine as soon as they can get
it, and we have already heard
from John to that effect.
Some people are a little bit
more worried about it.
I think it is a really important
point, and actually,
Jay’s position, to say "I am
going to wait and see what happens"
is probably a common response.
I think we need to remember
that actually vaccines,
next to clean water,
have been the single most
effective public health
implementation globally.
They have saved more lives
than any other medicine,
and the people are concerned
about this vaccine because they
perceive that it has
been done too quickly,
and actually we have done
a disservice in saying that it takes
ten years to make a vaccine.
Technology is changing very,
very quickly and what has happened
is that the same number
of participants have been
exposed to this vaccine,
this particular vaccine,
43,000 participants and when you are
looking at side effects,
most of the side effects occur very
quickly, within one week
or so of having a vaccine,
we would see any severe side effects
at this stage and no
regulatory authority,
whether it is the UK medicines
regulatory authority or the European
regulatory authority or the FDA
will let anything go through that
does not have a totally
squea ky—clean safety record.
Now, one thing that I think people
completely forget is that a vaccine
stimulates your immune system,
it tricks it to see if it has seen
the virus, so you are getting
an aspect of a viral infection,
that is so much minor
than the real virus,
so when you think about the risk
benefit, the risk of having a severe
outcome from Covid—19 for outweighs
any theoretical risk of a vaccine
and the problem is vaccines
are so successful that diseases go
away and all you see
is the side effects.
Pour out any medicine, paracetamol,
we have probably all had it,
and look at the potential side
effects of paracetamol.
If you had never taken before, it
would probably scare you to take it,
but you don’t have the same
concerns, because you
are familiar with it.
And I think the way we will build
confidence is when we roll it out
to vulnerable populations,
who are desperate for a vaccine,
to get their lives back to some sort
of normality and we see it
protecting lives and we see it
being safe, I am sure people
like Jay will start to see
the evidence speaks for itself.
Stewart, you have got a question.
Good evening, panel, yes.
For those that are not
in the initial bracket
to receive the vaccine,
will they still need to abide
by the social distancing or even
face the potential of going back
into lockdowns as well?
Yes, how is this
going to work, Matt?
Will there be a section
of the population who can go party,
while everyone else has to wait,
or how’s it to work?
Because at first we don’t know
whether, even if you have had
the vaccine, you might
still transmit the disease,
that means that we can’t lift those
measures on just the people who have
had the vaccine, because you still
might give it to someone else
and what we have to do is vaccinate
to protect the most vulnerable
and then get to the position
where enough people have had it
and we will of course monitor
afterwards, as we vaccinate
the population come out to find out
the impact on the transmission
of the disease.
All of this is about how to get life
back to normal as fast
as possible and the reason,
another reason to do this in terms
of clinical priority,
to your point earlier,
is that the faster we can vaccinate
those who are most vulnerable
of dying from Covid,
the sooner we will be able to start
to get life back to normal
for everybody else as well.
So, this is another of those
questions that at the moment
is unknowable, but the plan to roll
out, according to clinical priority,
is the best way to get,
as fast as possible,
to as much back to
normal as possible.
Merryn, as far as business
is concerned, this is the time frame
they desperately need.
When will businesses be able to open
up and operate normally again?
That would be an absolute
game—changer, just the knowledge
that there will be a vaccine
by spring and let’s say that
most vulnerable people and people
have been vaccinated
by late spring, then
I am sure Matt might
have a different opinion of it,
but I would think that the majority
of the economy could open up
properly and if businesses know
that they can move out of this
appalling cycle of not knowing
what is going to happen,
of hyper regulatory activity,
lockdown this, tier this,
curfew this, rules all over
the place, up, Down, up, Down,
up, Down, never knowing
exactly where they are,
if they can start looking forward
to a future that is linear,
where things don’t change
all the time, then they can start
moving their businesses around
to make them work again.
So, in that sense, it is an absolute
game—changer for business
and that is why you saw these
astonishing moves in
the stock market on Monday
when you saw effectively
all the companies that
are geared into the return
of normal life, airlines,
pubs, etc go completely berserk
and all the stocks that are geared
into the nightmare that we live now,
like working from home, etc,
fall very significantly,
so it means that the economy has
finally started to look
forward to, as I say,
something a bit more
linear, less choppy.
Andy, you have had your hand up
for a while, but you have also got
a specific question that I know
you wanted to ask.
Yeah, so I will cover
both of that in order.
There is a priority list,
NHS workers, health
and social care workers,
etc, I wonder where the unpaid
carers are that are sort
of the unsung heroes,
caring for family members,
where they are in this priority
list, because they don’t seem
to be mentioned nationally?
Let us just find out.
Are they going to be
in the priority list?
Defining the social care workers...
These are sort of unpaid carers.
Yes, but my goodness,
they may be unpaid,...
I’m not downgrading what they do,
I am saying will they be
in the first wave?
Well, theJoint Committee that
advises me will define exactly how
broad that category is.
Would you like to see them in there?
I would like to follow
the clinical advice.
I know I am not giving an answer
and I think that is because I think
it is really important
that we follow the clinical advice.
Andy, why don’t you put
the question that you have
prepared as well.
Transport, post Brexit,
is key as we rely on the vaccine
being expedited through customs
and other such barriers,
how will we ensure the Brexit post
January importation of the vaccine
does not have an impact on Covid,
the two don’t be sort
of playing against each other
with swaying priorities?
This is something that came up
from a lot of members
of the audience, actually.
Look, we were told by Boris that we
would have an oven ready deal.
We have no deal, we have Boris
putting the Good Friday Agreement
on the table, which jeopardises that
deal, we have got the Chief
Executive of the Port of Dover
saying that a no—deal Brexit
could cost us, I think
it was a billion a week,
and that traffic ﬂows could be down
by between 40—60%.
The clock is ticking,
we are running out of time
and it is now looking worrying
that we will have no deal
with the European Union
and we will have no deal by the way
with the United States of America,
because we would have risked
the Good Friday Agreement by having
that no deal.
Look, it is desperately
important that we get a deal,
that it is frictionless trade,
that it does not involve tariffs,
that we have got food safety,
we have got health safety,
that we have not got queues
and lorries backed up
and I suspect a lot of people,
in an area like Dover are really
worried, because a lot of promises
were being made and we wait to see
what will happen, but we know
we have now got days,
days, to deliver this,
against the backdrop
against the backdrop,
and just remember, a lot
of people were saying,
look, this is tough,
we have got all the European
countries dealing with this
pandemic, we have got
all European countries dealing
with the economic consequences,
let’s have a little extension,
while we work this out.
IF}
We’re going to have a deal.
We’re going to put the Good Friday
Agreement on the table.
It’s a mess, but we need the deal.
Over to Matt Hancock.
Hang on, before we get to Matt,
Donna, I know there was something
you wanted to add into this
particular subject as well.
Yes, absolutely.
On the lst of January, 2021,
will Dover become a well oiled
gateway to Europe or the biggest car
and lorry park in the world?
And it all plays into
the same thing, doesn’t it?
A, what is going to happen
the end of December,
but also in terms of us getting this
vaccine and getting it
through customs, is that
going to be a problem?
Is this something that
you thought about, Robin,
is this a concern for you?
We haven’t thought about this
directly in terms of
what the immediate priority is,
but we certainly recognise,
in the UK, particularly
as we go through Brexit,
that we need to really ramp up UK
manufacturing capacity,
so that we can make vaccines
and we have the cutting edge
technology in this country
and I think one of the things
that we recognise is,
from a pragmatic point of view,
we have made, the government has
made purchase of six vaccines,
five of those are from overseas.
That is actually increasing our
reliance on overseas production.
You are involved in
developing a vaccine as well
at Imperial College.
We are one of the two UK teams
developing a vaccine.
Are you getting funding
from the government as well?
We are getting funding
from the government,
but it is still requires a huge
effort for us to build a technology
from scratch and to give the kind
of examples of the competition,
there are 30 R&A companies
around the world.
This is the particular technology
that Pfizer have used?
It is a new technology at a tipping
point and our competition,
our direct competition,
are two companies in Germany,
one of which is BioNTech,
and they got grants from the German
government of 350 million
and 250 million apiece,
even though they are well funded,
and so we need to think in terms
of the strategy as to how
we are going to nurture a vaccine
industry, which is more thanjust
start—up, that is sustainable
and has a long—term strategic plan.
Are you getting those kind of sums
from the Secretary for Health?
We are getting support and we fully
anticipate that the government
will want to see the two flagship
vaccine programme is being
supported to the hilt.
Daniel.
Picking up on the Shadow
Justice Secretary’s point,
will the defeat in the House
of Lords of the clauses
of the Internal Market Bill
on Monday have any impact
on government policy, especially
with a President—electJoe Biden?
Antonio?
Hello there.
My question, in fact, is for Matt.
Matt has mentioned that there
are several companies, several deals
going on regarding the vaccine
and I just want to know,
these pharmaceutical
companies that are involved,
will make an enormous
amount of money.
My question to Matt is this,
does the government have any
strategies in place to ensure
that these pharmaceutical companies
give back to the system
from their profits, to ensure that
everyone in the UK who wants
the vaccine can have it,
rather than being held to ransom
for what they can produce
and what the government wants
to pay for the vaccine?
Justin.
Sorry.
Sorry, while this announcement
is welcome, does Mr Hancock think it
goes anywhere near to placating
an increasingly apathetic population
who, for the last nine months,
have been drip fed a series
of failures and costly failure
and double standards.
Joe.
Yes, I think the answer given
that the NHS will be able to manage
the roll—out and the NHS will do it,
the NHS relies on subcontractors
to do the job of rolling it out.
Recently, the vetting has suffered
and I have also heard rumours
that there are simply not enough
medical grade vials
or lorries around in order...
Or even PPE, for the roll—out
of this vaccine, so to say
that the NHS will do it, well,
the NHS can only do it
if they get the support
in order to do theirjob,
so, you know, it would be
a monumental waste of money
to buy the vaccine...
and it becoming effective.
Well, lots and lots of different
points there and I am going to drag
us back for a moment,
to the original question,
which came from Andy,
about confidence, about getting
the vaccine through.
Yes.
Post the end of December.
Are you utterly confident...
We have heard all sorts
of warnings from road hauliers,
about not being ready,
about hold—ups at Customs, you know,
lorry parks and all the rest of us,
or are you confident that
that is not going to be a problem?
We have a plan for the vaccine
which is being manufactured
in Belgium and, if necessary,
we can fly it in order
to avoid those problems.
It is a lot more expensive
than getting it through
on a lorry, isn’t it?
Well, the importance of this vaccine
cannot be underestimated,
so we have got a plan
for all eventualities and many
of the points that were made,
some of the excellent points
about some of the challenges,
like Joe’s point about the fact that
vaccinators needed PPE,
absolutely that is a critical
part of the plan.
So, it underlines how this
is a hugely complex project,
but it is one that we have been
preparing for for some time.
So, you are confident that Brexit,
if we do leave the European Union
without a deal, is not going to hold
up the delivery of the
vaccines to this country?
I am confident of that,
we have a plan for all of these
eventualities, yes.
Rosie, I think you
wanted to come in.
I have just set here,
increasingly getting annoyed
because I think we are hearing great
points and you’re taking the easy
questions and sharing one
answer and then moving on.
I wanted to come here today and talk
about the vaccine and feel reassured
that we are going to go into 2021
and be in a much better
and safer place and I don’t
know if we will be.
I absolutely think there is a point
at which this vaccine
that we heard about on Monday,
it is good news, but we are not
there yet and there are still a lot
of steps that we need
to get through.
So, I am only going to reassure
you and anybody else as much
as I can be confident about.
You’re not reassuring me at all.
Well, lam being honest
about the uncertainties
that we still face and I think
that is what I am duty—bound to do.
There are some things I am more
confident about, like, for instance,
we have done the work to make sure
we have the —70 capacity...
Can you even tell us when people
might first get the vaccine?
Well, we are planning
that if all goes well,
including the safety coming
through and including
the manufacturing going well
by Pfizer, we are planning to be
able to roll—out from the start
of December, which is not long.
One of the co—founders
of the company that is manufacturing
this vaccine said, not before mid
December, so you are not
quite on the same page.
Well, as I say, we are planning
to be ready from the 1st
of December, but we are not
guaranteeing that by any
stretch and, you know,
it would be easier, you know,
in the moment, for me to say,
no problem, all sorted,
we are just not there yet,
though, but what we can’t say
is that we are making progress
towards where we need to be,
but there are many, many hurdles
for us still to go over.
Merryn.
I just wanted to work
on reassuring Rosie a little bit,
because I think we are talking
about the vaccine at great length,
which is incredibly interesting
and very exciting and gives me
enormous hope that we
are at the beginning
of the end of the whole thing,
but we are not talking
about the various treatments that
have been coming along as well,
so while we wait for the vaccine
to be rolled out and for everyone
to get it, there is also a cheap
steroid that is working quite well,
there is a UK based company
that is in place to use trials
in using a drug that is known to be
very cheap working in different
illnesses that could work very well
and it has been shown
in a clinical trial,
so it is not just about the vaccine,
it is also about the fact
that we know there are very
good treatments there,
we know that death rates have been
falling during the second wave
over the first wave,
in older people in particular,
we know that the mortality rate
as a whole is very low
and we are also learning more
and more about how and where it
translates and I am sure
we will then get onto
whether lockdown is a good idea
or not later, but we know
for example that you don’t normally
get Covid when you’re out
shopping, for example.
So, you know, we are beginning
to know more and more about how
we can live relatively normal lives
with good treatments,
regardless of exactly
when the vaccine is rolled
out or not.
Merryn, you haven’t had a chance
to answer the question
about trying to get the vaccine
through if we leave
the EU without a deal.
I leave that to Matt because I’m
sure there are ways of getting back
things through long lorry cues,
but I am sure that the government
has organised, but the wider
question is presumably about Brexit
and whether there will be very long
lorry cues in Dover if we go
through with this on WTO terms under
specific FTA and the answer
to that is there probably will be
very long queues in Dover,
but there will probably belong
lorry queues regardless
of whether we have a deal or not,
because all change that involves
lots of pieces of paper and admin
and new types of organisation
results in difficulties
and hold—ups and blockages,
but that will, I would guess,
only last two or three months before
we come out the other end and that
will be unpleasant for the people
involved in it, but if you believe
that Brexit is a good thing
for the country long term,
it will end up being a relatively
small price to pay, I hope.
Let’s take another question now
on a different topic from Jamie.
Hello, panel.
So, having had a Disability
Discrimination Act for a 25 years,
are we now treating people with more
respect and equality?
Well, Rosie, I’m not trying
to pigeonhole you here, but I’m in,
in a sense you are the obvious
person to answer this.
Ican’t imagine!
But, give us the benefit
of your experience.
So, the disability act came
in in 1995, I was five years old,
and without a doubt,
my life has been
better because of it.
I had an education at a mainstream
school, I went to university,
I got a job and with by cerebral
palsy, I have been a successful
and independent human being and I am
proud of who I am and I can’t
ground—breaking disability act.
Saying that, we are 25 years
on and whenever I walk
in the street alone,
I wear headphones, because of how
I walk and I talk, I get
abuse on a daily basis.
I am not alone and not.
I am not alone and not I have had
times of unemployment,
unemployment is huge
amongst disabled people.
I have tried to apply forjobs
and I have been hung up
on because of how I speak and I am
not alone, because right now
a quarter of a million disabled
people are unemployed
and because of Covid,
that is rising.
I was going to say that disabled
people are overlooked,
but they are not, they are
deliberately ignored,
because disabled people need more
care and more money and I don’t feel
like, as a disabled person,
I am getting the care
and support I made right now.
David.
Well, I mean, it is
hard to follow that.
And that was very
moving to listen to.
Look, I suspect of course
there has been progress
over the last 25 years,
but we have got a long way to go.
Let me just say, I have three
children and one of them has sort
of educational special needs
and I know the struggle
of parents in this country
when they are trying
to get a statement.
Of course there is still huge
discrimination in employment.
I was thinking of the young
black man dragged out
of the Oxford Union,
blind, just a year or so ago.
I think that there is a lot to do
in this country and we probably have
to return to the legislation
that is required.
If you look at that story
of the 20th century,
it is a lot of people
at the beginning of that century,
certainly the disabled,
anyone with educational needs,
black and brown people,
women, working people,
all oppressed in some ways,
put down and by the end
of the 20th century,
beginning to get their rights.
But we are still on thatjourney.
And as we go into a deep recession,
we know that the people who can be
deeply affected or those
with disabilities and,
let me just say, if you defund local
authorities like we have in this
country, if you have got local
authorities like Croydon
or Northampton going bust,
with budget cuts of 50%,
where is the money for adult social
care that the disabled depend on?
Where is the money for the kit
and equipment that people
need in their homes?
All the money being cut in day
centres, right across the country?
So it is not a rosy picture,
in some ways it feels
like a rollback and I endorse
what has been said.
Robin.
I mean, I think the point is that
in terms of either being overlooked
or deliberately ignored is something
that society continues to need to be
challenged on and disability
comes in many shapes.
Visible disability often
leads to abuse, but also
I am very conscious,
one of my daughters has a chromosome
abnormality and she has no
physical disability,
but she is disadvantaged by a hidden
disability and I think
that is also a problem,
a hidden problem that people don’t
necessarily recognise.
I think it is so critical that
individuals like yourself,
Rosie, challenge the rest
of society repeatedly.
The fight needs to go on and we can
never be relaxed and not
challenge ourselves,
whether it is disability
or any type of prejudice.
Merryn.
I haven’t much to add to that to be
honest, except to say
that from what we hear,
there are not that many families
in the UK but are not in some way
touched by the difficulties
of having someone with a disability
inside theirfamily.
Obviously, there is a lot more to be
done to help everybody without,
but I would also say that we must
not underestimate how far we have,
over the last 25 years.
Everybody now understands,
which I don’t think they did then,
that lack of access to transport,
to buildings, to education,
to employment etc was a travesty
and now it is considered to be
something that everyone
should have access to.
So, there has been huge change
over the last 25 years,
obviously there is a long way to go,
but we must remember how far
we have come as well.
Merryn, I was quite surprised
to learn that rules on accessible
public transport came into force
on buses and coaches
from the end of this year.
So many years after
the Disability Discrimination Act,
rail replacement buses,
for example 60% of those
are not accessible.
There are quite a few hands up.
Emily.
Thank you.
I just want to applaud Rosie
on that, but also I want to raise
an issue that was just mentioned
about SEN and children
struggling in schools.
The delays in diagnosis
of neurodifferences at the moment
is over three years in most areas,
including Kent, and Covid is only
going to increase that delay.
The Disability Discrimination Act
give us the right to education,
there are lots of children that
are not able to access education
because they are still
waiting for a diagnosis.
What is going to be done about that?
Donna.
I think we need to remember that
anyone of us can become disabled
at any point in time.
So, when we are supporting
an increase in access
for disabled people,
we are actually
supporting ourselves.
We are supporting
the entire country.
So, I think, looking at this as just
issues for disabled people
is I don’t think it’s helpful,
it is about how do we increase
access for all of us,
including disabled people.
That is how I think
we should look at this.
Daniel.
Is it a matter of adding
new legislation or becoming
a lessjudgmental society?
Matt.
Well, I had admire you so much,
Rosie, for the way that
you articulate this
and I thought what Emily said
was so strong, in a small way,
I am neuro diverse, I am dyslexic,
and it took me until I was 18
until I was diagnosed and then I got
the support I needed and it made
an enormous difference to me.
But I was lucky, because I was able,
I was essentially able
to get by on my maths,
despite the fact that my language
skills were very poor, my written
language skills at school.
So, I have feltjust a tiny bit
of what that feels like,
but I think that Daniel’s point
is so important, which is of course
legislation is important,
and that is something we should
always be pushing forward,
like with the change in the bosses
at the end of this year,
I did not know about that,
I think that is really important,
but my God, how long has it taken us
to get to this point?
But it is also about society
accepting everyone and looking
for the good in everyone.
I think that everyone has something
to contribute and we need...
It is our task, our mission is to go
and find what is good in people
and the contribution they can make
and bring it out and support people
to do that, so I think
there is a long way to go.
Rosie, we are almost out of time,
I just want to give
you a final word on this.
I think I would kick
myself about talking
about the change between the DLA
Disability Living Allowance
to the personal independence
payment, because 650,000 disabled
people, including myself,
got caught and this just makes me
insanely angry that I thought
when I was assessed in 2008 that
money that kept me going,
that gave me support,
it was taken off me and luckily
I can work harder, I can push
myself, but a lot of disabled people
are now on the poverty line,
because they were assessed
by a stranger for ten minutes
who would look at them
and go, what do you need?
Thatjust makes my blood boil
and I want to end it by going,
stop ignoring disabled people.
We make up 22% of the population.
We are here and we are
worth listening to!
Rosie, look at that.
If there were people
here at the studio with us,
you would hear the applause.
You can only see it.
There you are.
I wanted to give you the final
word on that Rosie and
I am very glad I did.
Ourtime is up.
Tonight our questions came
from Dover and next week we will be
joined by an audience in Windsor
and the week after that,
Swansea, so do get in touch.
You are what makes Question Time
what it is, so do get in touch
if you would like to be part
of our virtual audience.
I do hope that you will.
You can apply by going
to the Question Time website
and there is an online form
there for you to fill in.
Adrian Chiles is coming up
as always on Five Live now
with Question Time Extra Time
with his guest so you can carry
on the conversation.
For now, thank you very
much to the panel.
Merryn, thank you forjoining us
from Edinburgh and of course
to our virtual audience,
from Dover, thank you and thank
you at home for watching.
From Question Time, bye bye.
MUSIC: Sestra
by Post War Glamour Girls
# A murder of crows
swept out of the blue
# He’s behind you now
# You cannot hear me... #
New Icelandic drama...
MUSIC: Shake It Out
by Florence + The Machine
Oh, that is absolutely fabulous.
Oh, my goodness!
That’s amazing.
You are a master.
phrase,
In a change to the schedules,
Newscast tonight
is going to be Brexitcast —
we are bringing back our old podcast
because it feels there’s quite
a lot to say on Brexit.
And the great thing is reality
obliged, because I’ve gone back
to trying to work out
Michel Barnier’s whereabouts.
Because at lunchtime today,
he tweeted that he was taking
a break from the negotiations,
and he went looking for some
level playing fields,
so took a picture of himself
in a playing field.
Of course, that is one of the big
disputes in the negotiations.
We should mention that you’re
chrging on the pitch,
they think it’s not quite all over,
because there’s seven weeks
to go and here comes Adam
chasing Michel Barnier.
And so it was a football pitch
in north London I was told,
so I went to my nearest football
pitch in north London,
and was Michel Barnier there?
No, he was not.
Oh, how did you feel?
Leaving me — well, it left me
with a sort of sad Gallic shrug that
I had just missed him.
Or maybe I had gone to the wrong
football pitch and so I didn’t
even nearly miss him,
he wasn’t even there.
That’s possible.
Haven’t you kind of tagged him
though, isn’t that why you always
used to find him in Brussels,
or is itjust because the Brussels
diplomatic quarter is small?
What are we to take though
from his wistful look?
Look across the playing fields
told by an EU contact?
Was it gallows humour
or a sign of optimism?
The former, it said.
0K.
And also I think he was probably
trying to take the mickey out
of the British Government,
for they are being a bit
tense at the moment,
and he’s quite relaxed.
So we are bringing Brexitcast back,
which means Katya Adler
is in the house, from Brussels.
Hello, Katya.
Hello.
And that means...
That feels so Eurovision,
doesn’t it?
Yeah.
It also means we are the only prime
time BBC One programme
that has a Katya left.
0h!
Welcome to Brexitcast.
Brexitcast.